nītassugrīvamaitrīṃ tadanu hanumatā dundubhe: kāyamuccai:
kṣiptvāṅguṣṭhena bhūyo luluvitha yugapat patriṇā sapta sālān |
hatvā sugrīvaghātodyatamatulabalaṃ bālinaṃ vyājavṛttyā
varṣāvelāmanaiṣīrvirahataralitastvaṃ mataṅgāśramānte ||1||
nīta:-sugrīva-maitrīṃ	having taken alliance with Sugreeva
tat-anu hanumatā	after that by Hanumaan
dundubhe: kāyam-	the corpse of Asura Dundubhi
uccai: kṣiptvā-aṅguṣṭhena	having flung far away with Thy toe
bhūya: luluvitha yugapat	then (Thou) cut asunder
patriṇā sapta sālān	by a single arrow seven Saala trees
hatvā sugrīva-ghāta-udyatam-	killed (the) eager to kill Sugreeva
atula-balaṃ bālinaṃ	Baali who had incomparable strength
vyājavṛtyā	by using a strategy
varṣā-velām-anaiṣī:-	(Thou) spent the rainy season
viraha-taralita:-tvaṃ	tormented by the pangs of separation (from Seeta)
mataṅga-āśrama-ante	near the Aashram of sage Matanga
Having taken alliance with Sugreeva which was brought about by Hanumaan, Thou flung far away the corpse of the Asura Dundubhi with Thy toe and also cut through seven Saala trees by a single arrow simultaneously, to demonstrate Thy strength to Sugreeva. Baali who was incomparable in strength and was eager to kill Sugreeva was killed by Thee by using a strategy. Thou then spent the rainy season tormented by the pangs of separation from Seetaa, near the hermitage of sage Matanga.
sugrīveṇānujoktyā sabhayamabhiyatā vyūhitāṃ vāhinīṃ tā-
mṛkṣāṇāṃ vīkṣya dikṣu drutamatha dayitāmārgaṇāyāvanamrām |
sandeśaṃ cāṅgulīyaṃ pavanasutakare prādiśo modaśālī
mārge mārge mamārge kapibhirapi tadā tvatpriyā saprayāsai: ||2||
sugrīveṇa-anuja-uktyā	by Sugreeva, on Thy younger brother Lakshmanaa's admonitions
sabhayam-abhiyatā	in fear Thou were approached
vyūhitāṃ vāhinīṃ tām-	and marshalled that army
ṛkṣāṇāṃ vīkṣya	of monkeys, seeing
dikṣu drutam-atha	in all directions quickly
dayitā-mārgaṇāya-avanamrām	to search for Thy wife, before Thee
saṃdeśaṃ ca-aṅgulīyaṃ	a message and a signet ring
pavanasuta-kare prādiśa:	in Hanumaan's hands gave
modaśālī	Thou who were very delighted
mārge mārge mamārge	in all directions searched for
kapibhi:-api tadā	by the monkeys, even then
tvat-priyā saprayāsai:	Thy consort, with full effort
When Thy younger brother Lakshmana admonished Sugreeva, he in fear approached Thee marshalling an army of monkeys, to search for Thy wife Seeta in all directions. Thou were delighted to see this and gave to Hanumaan who was standing before Thee, a message and a signet ring for Seetaa. The monkeys very diligently started on the mission to search for Thy consort Seeta.
tvadvārtākarṇanodyadgarudurujavasampātisampātivākya-
prottīrṇārṇodhirantarnagari janakajāṃ vīkṣya datvāṅgulīyam |
prakṣudyodyānamakṣakṣapaṇacaṇaraṇa: soḍhabandho daśāsyaṃ
dṛṣṭvā pluṣṭvā ca laṅkāṃ jhaṭiti sa hanumān mauliratnaṃ dadau te ||3||
tvat-vārtā-ākarṇan-	Thy accounts hearing
udyat-garut-uru-java-	having grown wings with great speed
sampāti-sampāti-vākya-	flies away (Sampaati), (and) by the words of that Sampaati
protīrṇa-arṇodhi:-antarnagari	(Hanumaan) jumped across the ocean in the city (of Lankaa)
janakajāṃ vīkṣya	seeing Seetaa
datvā-aṅgulīyam	and giving the ring
prakṣudya-udyānam-	destroying the garden
akṣa-kṣapaṇa-caṇa-raṇa:	and killing Aksha in the famous battle
soḍha-bandha:	put up with the bondage (of Brahmaastra)
daśa-āsyaṃ dṛṣṭvā	and seeing the ten faced one (Raavana)
pluṣṭvā ca laṅkām	and burning down Lanka
jhaṭiti sa hanumān	quickly that Hanumaan
mauliratnaṃ dadau te	gave to Thee the crest jewel (given by Seetaa)
On hearing Thy account Sampaati had grown fresh wings and flew away. As Sampaati had told him the whereabouts of Seetaa, Hanumaan jumped across the ocean and reached the city of Lankaa. There he saw Seetaa and gave her the ring, destroyed the garden, killed Aksha kumaar in the famous battle, and put up with the Brahmaastra bondage. Then he met the ten faced Raavana and burned down Lankaa. Hanumaan then quickly went to Thee and gave Thee the crest jewel sent by Seetaa.
tvaṃ sugrīvāṅgadādiprabalakapicamūcakravikrāntabhūmī-
cakro'bhikramya pārejaladhi niśicarendrānujāśrīyamāṇa: |
tatproktāṃ śatruvārtāṃ rahasi niśamayan prārthanāpārthyaroṣa-
prāstāgneyāstratejastrasadudadhigirā labdhavān madhyamārgam ||4||
tvaṃ sugrīva-aṅgada-ādi-	Thou, Sugreeva, Angada and other
prabala-kapi-camū-	warriors of the monkey army
cakra-vikrānta-bhūmī-	who conquered the earth
cakra:-abhikramya	set out to cross
pāre-jaladhi	to the other side of the ocean
niśicarendra-anuja-	by the younger brother of the Asura king
āśrīyamāṇa:	who sought refuge in Thee
tat-proktāṃ śatru-vārtāṃ	as told by him, the information of the enemy
rahasi niśamayan	hearing in secret
prārthanā-āpārthya-	(when) the requests were in vain
roṣa-prāsta-āgneya-astra-	in anger Thou sent the fire missile
teja:-trasat-udadhi-girā	in fright of its power, by the words of the ocean
labdhavān madhyamārgaṃ	Thou got a way through (the ocean)
Thou set out with a huge army of monkeys led by great warriors Sugreeva, Angad and others and conquering the whole earth reached the shore of the ocean. Raavana's younger brother Vibheeshana, crossed over to Thy side, and taking refuge in Thee, disclosed the secrets of the enemy which Thou heard in secret. When the requests made to the ocean deity were in vain, in anger Thou sent the fire missile to annihilate the waters of the ocean. Frightened by the power of the missile, as ordered by the ocean deity, Thou got a way through the ocean.
kīśairāśāntaropāhṛtagirinikarai: setumādhāpya yāto
yātūnyāmardya daṃṣṭrānakhaśikhariśilāsālaśastrai: svasainyai: |
vyākurvan sānujastvaṃ samarabhuvi paraṃ vikramaṃ śakrajetrā
vegānnāgāstrabaddha: patagapatigarunmārutairmocito'bhū: ||5||
kīśai:-āśāntara-	by the monkeys from all the directions
upāhṛta-girinikarai:	brought groups of mountains
setum-ādhāpya	a bridge getting built
yāta: yātūni-āmardya	went (to Lanka), destroyed the Raakshasas
daṃṣṭrā-nakha-śikhari-śilā-sāla-śastrai:	teeth, nails, mountains, rocks and trees having as weapons
svasainyai: vyākurvan	with Thy armies displaying
sānuja:-tvaṃ samara-bhuvi	with Thy brother in the battle field
paraṃ vikramaṃ	terrific prowess
śakrajetrā vegāt-nāgāstra-baddha:	by Indrajit soon tied down by Naagaastra
patagapati-	by Garuda's
garut-mārutai:-	force of wind of his wings
mocita:-abhū:	were (soon) released
The monkeys from all the quarters brought mountains and rocks by which Thou got a bridge built across Lanka.Crossing over Thy army of monkeys attacked the Raakshasas with teeth claws mountains rocks and palm trees as weapons. With Thy brother displaying terrific power in the battle field, Raavana's son Indrajit soon tied down Thy troops with Naagaastra. Garuda, Thy vehicle soon released them from that state by fanning them with his wings.
saumitristvatra śaktiprahṛtigaladasurvātajānītaśaila-
ghrāṇāt prāṇānupeto vyakṛṇuta kusṛtiślāghinaṃ meghanādam |
māyākṣobheṣu vaibhīṣaṇavacanahṛtastambhana: kumbhakarṇaṃ
samprāptaṃ kampitorvītalamakhilacamūbhakṣiṇaṃ vyakṣiṇostvam ||6||
saumitri:-tu-atra	Lakshmana, there indeed
śakti-prahṛti-	by the missile 'Shakti' being struck
galat-asu:-	was slipping off life
vātaja-ānīta-	brought by Hanumaan
śaila-ghrāṇāt	the mountain (on which the herb grew) by smelling
prāṇān-upeta: vyakṛṇuta	got his life back and killed
kusṛti:-lāghinaṃ meghanādam	the master of magical arts - Indrajit
māyā-kṣobheṣu	disturbed by the magical powers of Raavana
vaibhīṣaṇa-vacana-hṛta-stambhana:	Thou were relieved from the stunning effect by Vibheeshana's words
kumbhakarṇaṃ samprāptaṃ	Kumbhakarna, who had come
kampita-urvītalam-	making the earth tremble
akhila-camū-bhakṣiṇaṃ	eating the whole army
vyakṣiṇo:-tvam	Thou killed
The missile 'Shakti' sent by Raavana, struck Lakshmana who was slipping off life. He was revived by smelling the herb which grew on the mountain which was then brought by Hanumaan. After that Lakshmana killed the master of the magical arts Indrajit. Thou were disturbed by the magical powers of Raavana and were relieved from its stunning effects by Vibheeshana's words. Kumbhkarna who came to join the battle, made the earth tremble and was devouring the army of monkeys, was then killed by Thee.
gṛhṇan jambhārisaṃpreṣitarathakavacau rāvaṇenābhiyuddhyan
brahmāstreṇāsya bhindan galatatimabalāmagniśuddhāṃ pragṛhṇan |
devaśreṇīvarojjīvitasamaramṛtairakṣatai: ṛkṣasaṅghai-
rlaṅkābhartrā ca sākaṃ nijanagaramagā: sapriya: puṣpakeṇa ||7||
gṛhṇan	accepting
jambhāri-saṃpreṣita-ratha-kavacau	the chariot and armour sent by Indra
rāvaṇena-abhiyuddhyan	fighting with Raavan
brahma-astreṇa-	by the Brahmaastra
asya bhindan-galatatim-	his row of heads cutting off
abalām-agniśuddhāṃ pragṛhṇan	Seetaa purified by fire accepting
deva-śreṇīvara-	by the Devas of high order
ujjīvita-samara-mṛtai:-	brought back to life who were killed in the battle
akṣatai: ṛkṣasaṅghai:-	who did not have any wounds, the host of monkeys
laṅkā-bhartrā ca sākaṃ	and along with the king of Lanka (Vibheeshana)
nija-nagaram-agā:	to Thy own city returned
sapriya: puṣpakeṇa	with Seetaa in the (chariot) Pushpaka
Accepting the chariot and the armour sent by Indra, Thou fought with Raavana and cut off his row of heads by the Brahmaastra, and accepted Seetaa after she was purified by fire. The Devas of high order healed and revived the host of monkeys who were wounded and killed in the battle. Then along with the king of Lanka, Vibheeshana, and Thy consort Seetaa, Thou returned to Thy own city of Ayodhyaa in the chariot Pushpaka.
prīto divyābhiṣekairayutasamadhikān vatsarān paryaraṃsī-
rmaithilyāṃ pāpavācā śiva! śiva! kila tāṃ garbhiṇīmabhyahāsī: |
śatrughnenārdayitvā lavaṇaniśicaraṃ prārdaya: śūdrapāśaṃ
tāvadvālmīkigehe kṛtavasatirupāsūta sītā sutau te ||8||
prīta: divya-abhiṣekai:-	pleased with the coronation done with holy waters
ayuta-sama-adhikān vatsarān	for more than ten thousand years
paryaraṃsī	ruled happily
maithilyāṃ pāpa-vācā	(pertaining) to Seetaa, because of the slander
śiva! śiva! kila	what a pity, indeed
tāṃ garbhiṇīm-abhyahāsī:	her, who was pregnant, abandoned
śatrughnena-ardayitvā	by Shatrughna was killed
lavaṇa-niśicaraṃ	Lavanaasura
prārdaya: śūdrapāśaṃ	(then Thou) killed the shudra ascetic
tāvat-vālmīki-gehe	after that in Vaalmiki's Aashrama
kṛtavasati:-upāsūta sītā	who was living, Seetaa gave birth to
sutau te	Thy two sons
Thou were pleased to be coronated with the holy waters and ruled happily for more than ten thousand years. Reacting to a scandalous gossip about Seetaa, Thou abandoned her in spite of her being pregnant. O what a pity. The Asura Lavanaasura was killed by Shatrughna and Thou killed the shudra ascetic. Thereafter, Seetaa who was living in Vaalmiki's aashrama gave birth to Thy two sons.
vālmīkestvatsutodgāpitamadhurakṛterājñayā yajñavāṭe
sītāṃ tvayyāptukāme kṣitimaviśadasau tvaṃ ca kālārthito'bhū: |
heto: saumitrighātī svayamatha sarayūmagnaniśśeṣabhṛtyai:
sākaṃ nākaṃ prayāto nijapadamagamo deva vaikuṇṭhamādyam ||9||
vālmīke:-	Vaalmeeki
tvat-suta-udgāpita-	then made Thy sons to sing
madhura-kṛte:-ājñayā	the beautiful composition, by his order
yajñavāṭe	in the premises of the Yagya
sītāṃ tvayi-āptukāme	Thou were desirous to take back Seetaa
kṣitim-aviśat-asau	she disappeared into the Earth
tvaṃ ca kāla-arthita:-abhū:	and Thou were requested by Kaala Yama
heto: saumitri-ghātī	for that reason Thou abandoned Lakshmana
svayam-atha sarayū-magna-	then Thou submerged in Saryu river
niśśeṣa-bhṛtyai: sākaṃ	along with all the attendants
nākaṃ prayāta:	going to Swarga
nija-padam-agama:	reached Thy abode
deva vaikuṇṭham-ādyam	O Lord! The eternal Vaikuntha
In the premises of the Yanjya by Vaalmeeki's order Thy sons sang the beautiful composition which was composed by him. Hearing it Raama was desirous of taking back Seetaa, but she disappeared into her mother Earth. At the request of the Kaala Yama to return to Thy abode Vaikunth, Thou first created reason to abandon Lakshmana and then Thou submerged in the river Saryu along with all Thy attendants. Then going to Swarga Thou reached Thy abode the eternal Vaikuntha.
so'yaṃ martyāvatārastava khalu niyataṃ martyaśikṣārthamevaṃ
viśleṣārtirnirāgastyajanamapi bhavet kāmadharmātisaktyā |
no cet svātmānubhūte: kva nu tava manaso vikriyā cakrapāṇe
sa tvaṃ sattvaikamūrte pavanapurapate vyādhunu vyādhitāpān ||10||
sa:-ayaṃ martya-avatāra:-tava	that this human embodiment of Thine
khalu niyataṃ	indeed happened
martya-śikṣā-artham-evaṃ	for mankind as a lesson only
viśleṣa-ārti:-	pangs of separation
nirāga:-tyajanam-api	(and) also abandoning of the innocent
bhavet	happen
kāma-dharma-atisaktyā	due to extreme addiction to attachment and Dharma (duty)
no cet	otherwise
sva-ātma-anubhūte:	(for Thee) who are established in self consciousness
kva nu tava manasa: vikriyā	how come Thy weakness of mind
cakrapāṇe	O Wielder of the Discuss!
sa tvaṃ satva-eka-mūrte	That Thou, the very embodiment of the Satvaguna
pavanapurapate	The Lord of Guruvaayur
vyādhunu vyādhi-tāpān	eradicate (my) sufferings from the disease
As a lesson to the mankind this human embodiment of Thee happened. Pangs of separation are caused by extreme attachment, as also extreme addiction to Dharma may lead to the abandoning of the innocent. Otherwise for Thee who are established in self consciousness how can such a weakness of mind be explained. O Wielder of the Discuss! Thou That very embodiment of the Satva guna! O The Lord of Guruvayur! eradicate my sufferings from the disease.